The city of Cessaria and its harbor were built by Herod the Great toward the end of the
1st century BCE.
He named the city after Caesar Augustus.
Located about 87 km or 54 miles north-west of Jerusalem on the Mediterranean coast, Cessaria
became an important maritime hub.
We will see one, a Roman theatre, two, a palace, three, a hippopotamus, and two, a
hippodrome, four, a pagan temple, and five, a man-made harbor.
This video of the ruins of Cessaria includes reconstructions, showing what these main buildings
may have looked like.
The city included the Roman theatre shown here on the right.
In 1961, in the ruins of this theatre, a stone bearing a Latin inscription that includes
the name of Pontius Pilate was found.
It was the first such inscription to be found.
Next, we see a palace that extended toward the sea.
It may have been here that Paul, awaiting to be transferred to Rome, was able to give
a persuasive witness about Jesus to Governor Felix, and later to Governor Festus and King
Agripper II.
A hippodrome, or Stadium for horse racing and other events, was located next to the palace.
This stadium could hold an estimated 30,000 spectators.
An aqueduct supplied Cessaria with water, and the city had its own sewer system.
The city had a pagan temple.
Its location and size made it a prominent landmark for those on ships entering the harbor.
The man-made harbor was an engineering marvel.
It was one of the largest seaports of the Roman world, making Cessaria a centre for international
trade.
The Apostle Paul and other Christians travelled to and from Cessaria by boat.
Philip the evangeliser travelled to Cessaria at the end of a preaching tour and possibly
settled there.
The first Gentile Christians, Cornelius and his household, lived in that city.
And it was probably in Cessaria that Luke wrote his gospel.